Katacoda Tutorial : Downsampling and Unlimited Metric Retention for Prometheus (#2840)
thanos-io/thanos: tutorials/katacoda/thanos/2-lts/step1.md

# Step 1 - Initial Prometheus Setup

Thanos builds upon vanilla Prometheus instances which states it seamlessly integrates into existing Prometheus setups.

In this tutorial, we will be using two Prometheus Servers.

> * We have one Prometheus server in eu1 region and one Prometheus servers scraping the same target in us1 region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We have one Prometheus server in eu1 region and one Prometheus server scraping the same target in us1 region.
```

please use text linting tools / proofreaders

First, for the EU Prometheus server that scrapes itself:

<pre class="file" data-filename="prometheus0_eu1.yml" data-target="replace">
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s
  external_labels:
    cluster: eu1
    replica: 0

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:9090']
</pre>

Second, for the US Prometheus server that scrapes the same target:

<pre class="file" data-filename="prometheus0_us1.yml" data-target="replace">
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s
  external_labels:
    cluster: us1
    replica: 0

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:9091']
</pre>

## Starting Prometheus Instances

Let's now start two containers representing our two different Prometheus instances.

Execute following commands:

### Prepare "persistent volumes"

```
mkdir -p prometheus0_eu1_data prometheus0_us1_data
```{{execute}}

### Deploying "EU1"

```
docker run -d --net=host --rm \
    -v $(pwd)/prometheus0_eu1.yml:/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
    -v $(pwd)/prometheus0_eu1_data:/prometheus \
    -u root \
    --name prometheus-0-eu1 \

>     quay.io/prometheus/prometheus:v2.14.0 \

Reviewer 2: Maybe 2.19.0

# Step 1 - Initial Prometheus Setup

Thanos is a set of components that adds high availability to Prometheus installations by the cross-cluster federation, unlimited storage, and global querying across clusters.

Thanos builds upon vanilla Prometheus instances which states it seamlessly integrates into existing Prometheus setups.

In this tutorial, we will be using one Prometheus Server in the eu1 region.

Let's start this initial Prometheus setup, ready?

## Generate Artifical Metric Data

Execute the following command:

```

> docker run quay.io/thanos/thanosbench:docker-2019-10-04-a84ac8e block plan -p realistic-k8s-2d-small --labels 'cluster="one"' --max-time 2019-10-18T00:00:00Z

Author: @bwplotka adding image `dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:1.0` seems to work fine, (as Povilas suggested me to push own thanosbench image into the repository), the current image `quay.io/thanos/thanosbench:docker-2019-10-04-a84ac8e` is giving error:
```
Error parsing commandline arguments: expected command but got "block"
thanosbench: error: expected command but got "block"
```

Author: And can you please tell me how to further share this `dir` with the prometheus?
(because the prometheus container is not yet started 🤔)

Author: Marking resolved !!!

# Step 1 - Initial Prometheus Setup

Thanos is a set of components that adds high availability to Prometheus installations, unlimited metrics retention and global querying across clusters.

Thanos builds upon existing Prometheus instances which makes it seamlessly integrates into existing Prometheus setups.

> In this tutorial, we will be using one Prometheus Server.

Author: Agreed, and added !!

Let's start this initial Prometheus setup, ready?

## Generate Artifical Metric Data

> Execute the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before starting Prometheus, let's generate some artificial data. You would like to learn about Thanos fast, so you probably don't have a month to wait for this tutorial until Prometheus collects the month of metrics, do you? (:  

We will use our handy [thanosbench](link here) project to do so.

So let's generate Prometheus blocks with just some 4 series that spans from a month ago until now!

Execute the following command:
```

```
mkdir -p test
```{{execute}}

```
docker run -i dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:v7 block plan -p realistic-key-k8s-1d-small --labels 'cluster="one"' --max-time 2019-10-18T00:00:00Z | docker run -v /root/test:/test -i  dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:v7 block gen --output.dir test

> ```{{execute}}

Reviewer 2: We can put that as one command
```
mkdir -p test && docker run -i dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:v7 block plan -p realistic-key-k8s-1d-small --labels 'cluster="one"' --max-time -30d | docker run -v /root/test:/test -i  dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:v7 block gen --output.dir test
```
I guess this will OOM or take ages? I can help and take a look what we can improve here. Can you propose PR with whatever you have in `dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:v7` for `realistic-key-k8s-1d-small`?

Author: @bwplotka to the surprise, it will take just a few seconds, so in my opinion, we can make it one command as you suggested above and keep it as only.

Sure, will propose PR on our `thanosbench` repo !!

Author: https://github.com/thanos-io/thanosbench/pull/26 proposed :)

Reviewer 2: Commented, thanks. :+1:

## Prometheus Configuration Files

> Here, we will prepare configuration files for the Prometheus instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, we will prepare configuration files for the Prometheus instance that will run with our pre-generated data.
It will also scrape our components we will use in this tutorial.
```

Click `Copy To Editor` for config to propagate the configs to file.

<pre class="file" data-filename="prometheus0_eu1.yml" data-target="replace">
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s
  external_labels:
    cluster: eu1
    replica: 0

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:9090']
  - job_name: 'sidecar'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:19090']
  - job_name: 'minio'
    metrics_path: /minio/prometheus/metrics
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:9000']
  - job_name: 'store_gateway'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:19090']
</pre>

## Starting Prometheus Instances

> Let's now start the container representing Prometheus instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's now start the container representing Prometheus instance. Note `-v $(pwd)/test:/prometheus \` and `--storage.tsdb.path=/prometheus` that allows us to place our generated data in Prometheus data directory
```

Execute the following commands:

### Prepare "persistent volumes"

### Deploying "EU1"

```
docker run -d --net=host --rm \
    -v $(pwd)/prometheus0_eu1.yml:/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
    -v $(pwd)/test:/prometheus \
    -u root \
    --name prometheus-0-eu1 \
    quay.io/prometheus/prometheus:v2.19.0 \
    --config.file=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
    --storage.tsdb.path=/prometheus \
    --storage.tsdb.max-block-duration=2h \
    --storage.tsdb.min-block-duration=2h \
    --web.listen-address=:9090 \
    --web.external-url=https://[[HOST_SUBDOMAIN]]-9090-[[KATACODA_HOST]].environments.katacoda.com \
    --web.enable-lifecycle \
    --web.enable-admin-api && echo "Prometheus EU1 started!"
```{{execute}}

## Setup Verification

Once started you should be able to reach the Prometheus instance here:

> * [Prometheus-0 EU1](https://[[HOST_SUBDOMAIN]]-9090-[[KATACODA_HOST]].environments.katacoda.com/)

Reviewer 2: I would add parameters that will give us 30d query to show exactly what we want users to see (:

Author: We should use this `prometheus_http_response_size_bytes_sum` !!

Author: or maybe we should not write this here as under the `Thanos Sidecar` and `Problem Statement` section, we have mentioned it :)

Author: WDYT??

Reviewer 2: There is no really big deal if we add extra link or not (: up to you

# Step 1 - Initial Prometheus Setup

> Thanos is a set of components that adds high availability to Prometheus installations by the cross-cluster federation, unlimited storage, and global querying across clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanos is a set of components that adds high availability to Prometheus installations, unlimited metrics retention and global querying across clusters.
```

> Thanos builds upon vanilla Prometheus instances which states it seamlessly integrates into existing Prometheus setups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanos builds upon existing Prometheus instances which makes it seamlessly integrates into existing Prometheus setups.
```

> In this tutorial, we will be using one Prometheus Server in the eu1 region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we will be using one Prometheus Server.
```

Let's start this initial Prometheus setup, ready?

## Generate Artifical Metric Data

Execute the following command:

```
mkdir test
```{{execute}}

```

> docker run -i dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:v1.4 block plan -p realistic-key-k8s-1d-small --labels 'cluster="one"' --max-time 2019-10-18T00:00:00Z | docker run -i dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:v1.4 block gen --output.dir test

Reviewer: you need to add a docker volume to actually write it to the test directory, like in here https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/pull/2840/files#diff-3ebc19a6a112ac8bb9c23b456789d37fR71

```{{execute}}

## Prometheus Configuration Files

Here, we will prepare configuration files for the Prometheus instance.

Click `Copy To Editor` for config to propagate the configs to file.

<pre class="file" data-filename="prometheus0_eu1.yml" data-target="replace">
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s
  external_labels:
    cluster: eu1
    replica: 0

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:9090']
  - job_name: 'sidecar'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:19090']
  - job_name: 'minio'
    metrics_path: /minio/prometheus/metrics
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:9000']
  - job_name: 'store_gateway'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:19090']
</pre>

## Starting Prometheus Instances

Let's now start the container representing Prometheus instance.

Execute the following commands:

### Prepare "persistent volumes"

```
mkdir -p prometheus0_eu1_data
```{{execute}}

### Deploying "EU1"

```
docker run -d --net=host --rm \
    -v $(pwd)/prometheus0_eu1.yml:/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \

>     -v $(pwd)/prometheus0_eu1_data:/prometheus \

Reviewer: this one doesn't use the test directory u generated blocks in, is that on purpose?

# Step 1 - Initial Prometheus Setup

Thanos is a set of components that adds high availability to Prometheus installations, unlimited metrics retention and global querying across clusters.

Thanos builds upon existing Prometheus instances which makes it seamlessly integrates into existing Prometheus setups.

In this tutorial, we will mimic the usual state with a Prometheus server running for several months. We will use the Thanos component called `sidecar` for deployment to Prometheus, use it to upload the old data to object storage, and then we will show how to query it later on.

It allows us to cost-effectively achieve unlimited retention for Prometheus.

Let's start this initial Prometheus setup, ready?

## Generate Artifical Metric Data

Before starting Prometheus, let's generate some artificial data. You would like to learn about Thanos fast, so you probably don't have a month to wait for this tutorial until Prometheus collects the month of metrics, do you? (:

We will use our handy [thanosbench](link here) project to do so.

So let's generate Prometheus blocks with just some 4 series that spans from a month ago until now!

> Execute the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Execute the following command (It might take a minute):
```

```

> mkdir -p test && docker run -i dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:v7 block plan -p realistic-key-k8s-1d-small --labels 'cluster="one"' --max-time 2019-10-18T00:00:00Z | docker run -v /root/test:/test -i  dockerenginesonia/thanosbench:v7 block gen --output.dir test

Reviewer 2: Let's ensure max time is actually time.Now? (we can play with Linux `date` to obtain correct format (: )

Author: If we change max time with `--max-time $(date -u +%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%SZ)` it is going to effect step-3 also, `## How to query Thanos store data?` section

Also don't we need historical data? Why we are changing it to time.now? :)

Reviewer 2: Yea the plan is to actually have even 1y time from now to -1y. Then it's easy to query this data (: 

Also we need to change this to `--max-time=-6h` to not interact with Prometheus WAL to much :hugs:

Reviewer 2: will update more changes on this as I did them for demo purposes

```{{execute}}

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's mention:

>  On successful block creation you should see following log lines:
> ```
> level=info ts=2020-10-20T18:28:42.625041939Z caller=block.go:87 msg="all blocks done" count=9
> level=info ts=2020-10-20T18:28:42.625100758Z caller=main.go:118 msg=exiting cmd="block gen"
> ```
> 
> Run `ls -l test/` to see generated 9 blocks.

Here, we will prepare configuration files for the Prometheus instance that will run with our pre-generated data.
It will also scrape our components we will use in this tutorial.

Click `Copy To Editor` for config to propagate the configs to file.

<pre class="file" data-filename="prometheus0_eu1.yml" data-target="replace">
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s
  external_labels:
    cluster: eu1
    replica: 0

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:9090']
  - job_name: 'sidecar'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:19090']
  - job_name: 'minio'
    metrics_path: /minio/prometheus/metrics
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:9000']
  - job_name: 'store_gateway'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['127.0.0.1:19095']
</pre>

## Starting Prometheus Instances

Let's now start the container representing Prometheus instance.

Note `-v $(pwd)/test:/prometheus \` and `--storage.tsdb.path=/prometheus` that allows us to place our generated data in Prometheus data directory.

Execute the following commands:

### Prepare "persistent volumes"

### Deploying "EU1"

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's mention what we do here 

"Let's deploy Prometheus. Note that we disabled local Prometheus compactions `storage.tsdb.max-block-duration` and min flags. Currently, this is important for the basic object storage backup scenario to avoid conflicts between bucket and local compactions. Read more [here](https://thanos.io/tip/components/sidecar.md/#sidecar).
